Let’s summarize what we’ve learned in
this lecture and this lecture has been all
about forward kinematics.
That’s the problem of determining the pose
of the robot tip or the robot’s end effector
given a set of the joint coordinates, the
things that vary as the robot moves.
For a robot within joints, we denote the end
effector pose as Ksi N and it is a function
of the joint coordinates, which are vector
of length N. And, we typically denote the
vector of joint coordinates by the symbol
Q and this function which maps the joint angles
to the end effector pose, we denote by the
symbol K, K for kinematic, the forward kinematic
function.
We looked at a number of examples about how
to determine the robot tooltip pose.
We did that by drawing the robot, by taking
a reference coordinate frame attached to the
base of the robot and then walking it through
the robot mechanism.
We would rotate it and translate it from the
base of the robot through to the end effector.
We could then write down a sequence of elementary
transformations, which we could expand and
multiply out to come up with an expression
for a homogeneous transformation which represents
the pose of the robot’s end effector.
So, we did it for a simple planar robot with
just two joints and we also did it for a robot
with four joints whose end effector moves
in three-dimensional space.
We did this for a number of robots that move
in two dimensions and in three dimensions,
and hope you got the idea about how you can
write down this transformation expression
almost by inspection, just by looking at the
robot and, in your mind, walking a coordinate
frame from the base of the robot through each
of the links and each of the joints until
it get to the end effector.
It’s a very simple and very intuitive way
of writing the expression for robot end effector
pose.
We introduced the rather formal concept of
a configuration space.
As just mentioned, the configuration of a
robot with N joints is the joint configuration
vector.
The elements in that vector or an angle if
the joint is rotational, revolute, and it
is a link if the joint is prismatic or sliding.
The set of all of these vectors is referred
to as the configuration space of the robot.
It’s a subset of the N dimensional space
of real numbers where N is the number of joints
in the robot.
The other concept that we introduced is the
task space of the robot and this is the space
of all possible end effector poses.
For a two-dimensional robot, the task space
is a subset of SE2 which is the set of all
possible positions and orientations in the
plane.
For a three-dimensional robot, the task space
is a subset of SE3, the set of all possible
positions and orientations in three-dimensional
space.
For this 2-degree of freedom planar robot
arm, its configuration space is a subset of
the space of two-dimensional real numbers
because the configuration can be described
by two real numbers, Q1 and Q2.
Its task space is also a subset of the two-dimensional
space of real numbers and that’s because
its end effector pose can be described by
two real numbers, X and Y.
We can describe the configuration and task
space for a 3-degree of freedom Cartesian
Gantry robot and we can also describe it for
a 4-degree of freedom SCARA robot whose end
effector moves in three dimensions.
Most functional real world robots, for example
industrial robots, have got six joints.
So, their configuration space is six dimensional.
The task space is also six dimensional which
means that the end effector can adopt an arbitrary
position and an arbitrary orientation within
the limits of the working volume of that particular
robot.
There is an important constraint that the
dimension of the configuration space must
be greater than or equal to the dimension
of the task space.
Here’s an example of a robot where the dimension
of the configuration space is much bigger
than the dimension of the task space.
We refer to a robot like this as a redundant
robot.
So, although its task space is the same as
that of a 6-degree of freedom robot like the
Puma robot we looked at previously, it’s
able to adopt any pose in three-dimensional
space.
Its configuration space is much bigger.
It uses this logic configuration space so
that it can control not only the end effector
pose, but also the shape of the arm leading
from the base to the end effector.
We introduced Denavit-Hartenberg notation.
This involves attaching a coordinate frame
to the far end of each link in the robot.
And then, we can write an expression for the
relative pose between consecutive link reference
frames.
The Denavit-Hartenberg notation is very concise.
We can describe the relationship between frames
using simply four parameters.
This imposes a number of constraints though
on where we place the link coordinate frames.
And, the link coordinate frames do not necessarily
physically lie on the links of the robots
itself.
A Denavit-Hartenberg notation allows us to
very concisely describe any serial link mechanism.
So, here is a very concise table which describes
the kinematics of the two-link manipulator
arm.
The table has got two rows, one per joint,
and it has got four columns, one column for
each of the Denavit-Hartenberg parameters.
Because this robot is all revolute, that means
all of its joints are rotational.
The joint coordinates fall in the Theta column.
We use a very similar table for a more complex
robot like the Puma 560.
The table still has four columns, but now
it has got six rows, one row per joint of
the robot.
So, the most general way we can describe the
kinematics of a robot arm is in terms of the
kinematic function K and the parameters of
this function are the joint configuration
vector.
And remember, that is a vector that contains
either joint angles or joint offsets in the
case of a prismatic joint, and a number of
other vectors.
We have a vector of joint angles, a vector
of link offsets, a vector of link lengths,
and a vector of link twists, and a vector
of joint types whose elements describe whether
the corresponding joint is revolute or prismatic.
Most of the elements of Theta, D, A and alpha
are constant.
The joint configuration vector Q contains
the variables in the system and we substitute
elements of Q in to elements of Theta, or
elements of D according to the joint type
which is given by the corresponding of the
vector sigma.
Denavit-Hartenberg notation allows us to describe
links and joints by a group of four elementary
homogeneous transformations and we stack them
in end on end, one group per joint of the
robot.
In the case of a robot where all the joints
are revolute, we substitute the elements of
the joint configuration vector, the vector
Q in to the corresponding Theta elements.
For the case of a robot that has got a prismatic
joint as shown here.
We substitute the corresponding joint configuration
element in to the corresponding link of set
element, in this case, D2.
The robot kinematic function tells us the
relationship between the frame 0 and frame
6.
And frequently, we might want to relate frame
0 to some sort of factory or world reference
frame.
So, we introduce a base transform that tells
where link 0 is with respect to our world
reference frame, and we denote that by Psi
B. The forward kinematic function gives us
the pose of frame 6 and frame 6 is typically
attached to some sort of mounting plate or
flange on the end of the robot.
The actual tool, the thing that does the work,
is attached to that particular flange.
So, if we want to know the pose of the end
of a tool, the end of the thing that’s doing
the work which I’ve denoted here by frame
E, then we introduce another relative pose.
I call this KsiT and that stands for tool
transform.
We can write a pose expression for the pose
of the end effector with respect to the world
frame in terms of the base transform, the
forward kinematic function, and the tool transform.
All robots have got a finite workspace.
That’s the set of all reachable end point
positions.
All industrial robots come with a diagram
like this in their data sheet which shows
quite clearly the parts of the workspace that
they can and cannot reach.
In robotics, we’re interested in two kinematic
problems.
The forward kinematic problem has been the
subject of this lecture, and that is given
the joint angles, what is the pose of the
robot's end effector, the robot’s tooltip.
The subject of our next lecture is the inverse
kinematic problem.
That is given, when I have to design pose
of the robot’s end effector, what joint
angles do I require?